BOOK ONE CHAPTER ONE

DEFINING THE GREAT ENRICHMENT

What is the Great Enrichment?

The Great Enrichment is a greater value in the money supply.  That is, the buying power of Europeans increased.

It happened during the second part of the Nineteenth Century when fewer inputs in terms of labor and natural capital resulted in a great amount of output.  The exact mechanism had to do with the expansion of the socio-economic system into fossil fuels, and engineering solutions that went along with this new economic system.  

In addition, there was increased productivity in the land due to the Colombian Exchange of important staple crops and the Black Death.  Europe entered into a period of relative prosperity, which was still meager prosperity in modern terms, after the Black Death ravaged the countryside around 1200 and left less population per acre of land.  The importance of this to the resurgence of Europe is debatable.  There was not much improvement in farming productivity per acre, however, until the Colombian Exchange provided farmers with the potato, which became an important staple crop.  

There was a further surge in innovation after Liebig, a Bavarian scientist who came up with the important principles of plant nutrition.

It is important to realize there were other developments happening concurrently with the expansion of the production of countries due to new engineering applications.  Such developments were expansion of knowledge (plants require certain elements for nutrition), and reduction in uncertainties.  These developments have added stability to the system, so that humans are in a much better place than ever before (at least those people whose countries have gone through the Great Enrichment).

Value of Money Supply

The most central part of an economy is the value of the money supply, or the buying power of money.  While currency was traditionally made of precious metals, after WWII the world adopted the Bretton-Woods system of “fiat currency”.  This gave rise to the different notes of paper money that we are all familiar with.  Paper money has practical value in that it can be easily carried around, it is not possible to chip flakes off of it and it's value does not fluctuate with the value of the metals within it.  If the currency was ninety percent gold or some other precious metal it would be harder to control monetary policy, and a government could not simply print more money like governments around the world are want to do at times when it becomes important to increase the money supply.

In addition, paper money has these anti-counterfeight properties to it.  Assuring that the currency is legitimate can be easily done through modern scanning systems.  That is, many stores are equipped with devices that would detect counterfeited currency.  

The value of the money supply can be approximated by the value of all the goods that are bought in a current year, or the Gross Domestic Product.  



History of the Great Enrichment

The Great Enrichment is a product of the Enlightenment, and Enlightenment thinking.

Europeans had social priorities that wanted to reduce uncertainty.  Culture had created a period of relative stability and prosperity.  Thus, intellects could focus on abstract issues.

One can argue that the greatest invention of the Enlightenment was the printing press.

The Habsburg Empire was the height of refinement during Mozart’s era.  The structure of society was divided as such: nobility, who controlled society, and was very much like the Ancienne Regime in France in that there were counsels of peers who had a duty of care to respond to local matters.

However, like in France, the power of the nobility could be corrupted and often tread on common decency as money could influence the opinions of judges.

Enter Emperor Joseph, what they call an “Enlightened Despot”, to address systemic problems with a series of reforms, centralizing power in the process. These reforms included a uniform written code of justice, among other things.  

Watching developments in France, Emperor Joseph realized that the power of the state could be put to good use.  The centralized national system of government in France had eliminated the redundancy of having a powerful local government that operated like a dictatorship and a state that operated like a dictatorship.  Rather, local governments should be answerable to the state.  Unfortunately, local governments did not see it that way, and resisted Emperor Joseph’s reforms.

What they could not anticipate back in the 18th Century was that a rising tide lifts all boats.  Life has become increasingly easy for those in countries that have experienced enlightened reforms since.  These eventually happened in Austria as the nobility realized their precarious situation as a stream of refugee nobles fled to Austria from France 1789-1799 during the French Revolution, and post Napoleon all of Europe entered into the era of the modern state.

The rising tide lifts all boats: as the utility of money has increased the worker earning a median income has become rich compared to how things were before the utility of money has become so high.  In addition, the already rich who have passed down huge fortunes over generations have become the ultra-rich.  

REASONS WHY LIFE IS EASY AND BECOMES EASIER OVER TIME

There are reasons why having faith in the modern state makes things easy.  This is because the share of national revenue that goes to the state addresses social problems.  There is less conflict about who has authority, and transactions run more smoothly.  

Post Napoleon the Napoleonic Code was one of the first codes for buildings.  This code would have seemed extremely intrusive to people who wanted to build buildings in the private sphere.

Some societies have still not adjusted to this intrusion of the state and local governments via code enforcement for private buildings.
  
While societies may have already had informal standards for building construction, formal standards written down have become increasingly important since electrification.  Mistakes in routing wiring through houses can result in electrocution and occasionally fires.  Getting voltages wrong can damage electronic equipment.  As things get complicated having a code that contractors can follow simplifies things.

https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Napoleonic_Code

 
Institutions are already in place… people have faith in institutions to enforce their social priorities

Just like people living in the modern nation state with developed markets have faith in the state to protect them from foreign invasion, they have faith that public institutions to protect their interests.

Over time, bad actors are purged from the system.

Walmart Effect 

Commoditized world ensures that there are enough suppliers to accommodate everyone.  With international markets fruits are available year round.  Instead of waiting for things to grow, goods are available instantaneously.

Over time, the market will fill all available niches.  The lowest of low quality goods will go to the poor as recycled refuse from the rich.

Over time, risks are reduced

The ruling class is interested in reducing uncertainty, if they have a culture with winters.  Cultures with winters have faced great resource constraints on time to prepare for winter.  This permeated the culture.

People really go overboard at my anxiety group.  Modern anxieties are nothing compared to the anxieties people who have to be self-sufficient and rely on natural capital face.

When I lived in Guatemala I faced continued food insecurity.

The risks of food insecurity have been reduced as the productivity of land has increased.  The US with the most innovative farm sector in the world has also become the breadbasket of the world.

An example of this is innovations and institutions have gradually reduced the risk of consuming food itself as well.

VIENNA AN IDEAL CITY

After establishing stability.  Government was professional and impartial.  Citizens aided the functioning of government (police). 

Thus with stability achieved, society could move towards funding knowledge through the University of Vienna.  Today several busts are there of the prominent thinkers of this stories University.

Social priorities were towards reason.  However Balzman conflicted with the sense of order and seeking certainty.  The line of time moved in one direction… towards entropy.

With other kinds of uncertainty reduced, tackling uncertainty in science became a priority.

While engineering applications like the steam engine had been invented, there was no theory for why it worked.

Later Einstein would face similar doubts about quantum mechanics.




  
